Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Jessica Flanagan. She's the
Richard L. Mori Chair in Ethics and Democratic Values
at the University of Richmond. Where she teaches leadership
ethics, ethical decision making in healthcare, critical thinking, and
today we're going to talk about another one of
her interests, the ethics of sex work. So, Doctor
Flanagan, welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure
to everyone. Thank
you. It's great to be here.
OK, so first of all, and of course, whenever
I talk with the philosopher, I guess it's always
a good idea to start by defining some terms.
So, what is sex work or how do you
approach it?
Um, I just think of sex work as any
work that involves the sale of sexual services, so
it's just a subset of the labor market, where
the labor that people are doing is socially coded
as like sexual labor, and so that would be
stripping, or exotic dancing, um, or the provision of
sexual services is like, That some people call prostitution,
but also like sex therapy, uh, is part of
sex work, um, or like erotic massage, it's all
of that. But I think it's probably the most
helpful to just focus on the direct provision of
sexual services in a lot of the conversations because
that's the part of sex work that's the most
controversial in terms of like legal debates, like a
lot of the other stuff is already legal, and
so when people are talking about sex work, They're
usually just focused on like the sale of sex.
Mhm, YEAH, I, I mean pornography is also a
little bit controversial.
Yeah, I guess, yeah.
Yeah, uh, so, uh, I mean, how do you
approach sex work philosophically and do you have a
sort of a feminist approach to it or not?
So, I think of my approach as a feminist
approach, but it's a corrective to a trend that
I've noticed in other feminist philosophy, which is very
suspicious of markets, or very um quick to allege
that women who are making decisions that affirm men's
preferences about female labor, that those women have adaptive
preferences, that those women aren't really choosing, that they
don't really make that decision. Um, AND so, though
I also think of myself as a part of
feminist philosophy, some of my arguments are really aimed
in a way that targets a lot of what
I would say like mainstream feminist philosophy views. But
if you're asking if I think of myself as
a feminist philosopher, absolutely, because I think that the
arguments that I'm making are in favor of the
equal status of women. And I think that that's
kind of the core commitment of feminist philosophy, and
so I think of it that way. Yeah,
yeah, and I mean, there are also a sex
positive or sometimes people use that term sex positive
feminists, feminists who are in favor of sex, work,
pornography, and all of that, correct.
Right. I mean, I also think you can say
like, and I do think that it's a really
a valuable labor market, but I don't think that
you have to necessarily go so far as to
say, every part of that labor market is great,
non-problematic. Um, I think there's parts of that industry,
but of the sex industry that are really helpful
to people, and it's like meaningful labor that it's
like a mutually beneficial exchange. Like any labor market,
there's parts of it that You know, arise from
conditions of injustice, there's parts of that labor market
where there is like criminal activity or people are
being mistreated in ways that are quite wrong. But
that's true of all labor markets, there's nothing distinctive.
And so sometimes, um, advocates of sex work will
say things like, sex work is work, and when
they say that, They're not trying to make a
tautological claim. They're trying to say, We don't need
to defend sex work as being great and amazing.
We just need to say that sex work is
like other jobs. And so, sometimes it's great and
amazing, sometimes it's like really boring, and then sometimes
it's problematic, and like, that's all labor. So that's
that's just how work works.
Yeah, so I mean you approach sex work as
just another form of work, right? Or is, is
there anything special about it?
I do think that there's a social meaning that
a lot of people attach to sex, and so,
for example, people who are married or people who
are in monogamous relationships. They're going to view sex
as a different kind of activity than other things.
And so I think sometimes people who really care
about monogamy or monogamous marriages, they find institutions of
sex work very threatening, because it increases the availability
of their partner purchasing sex from somebody else, it
makes it more difficult for people to maintain monogamous
relationships, but in those cases, Sex is special because
the people in a monogamous relationship think of it
as special, and the place where it goes wrong,
where people are paying for sex, isn't that they're
paying for sex, it's that they're You know, violating
an agreement that they made with their wife or
partner, like that's the issue. Um, SO I totally
think for a lot of people in a lot
of subcultures, sex will carry this very strong social
significance, and people will want to treat it very
differently, but I don't think that's the kind of
difference that should be entrenched in legal institutions, because
not everybody is in a monogamous relationship, and even
if someone is in a monogamous relationship, I don't
think it should be illegal to cheat, and so.
I don't think we should go back to pinning
scarlet letters on people for adultery, and so there
is a lot of taboo around sex, and I
don't deny that. But I don't think that that's
the kind of thing that we should promote, and
I think it's interesting that a lot of that
taboo around sex comes from conservative or religious subcultures.
And yet at the same time, on the left,
among some branches of like feminist, progressive subcultures, we
see a similar adherence to purity culture from people
who would otherwise be very suspicious of norms and
taboos that would reify the monogamous nuclear family. And
so, there's kind of this horseshoe where there's a
purity culture on both sides of this ideological spectrum,
and I think Fine, if those cultures internally want
to endorse a bunch of purity norms, but I
don't think that they're entitled to impose it on
everybody else.
Right. Um, DO you think that sex work raises
issues surrounding sex equality in any way?
One thing that people will often say is that
they think that the sex industry is presumptively suspicious
or that it has less merit or fewer feminist
credentials, less merit from progressive standpoints, because
what does that mean exactly?
Yeah, so they'll think like, oh, we should be
like on guard about the sex industry. Like, here's
a red flag about the industry, like we should
be like a little worried about it from a
kind of left wing standpoint. And the reason is
because men are primarily the buyers of sex, and
women are primarily the sellers of sex. And so,
it's a labor market that already entrenches a gender
and sex-based difference in that labor market. And they'll
say similar things about You know, pornography for sure,
because a lot of times the things that's depicted
in pornography will sometimes be depicting subjugation of women,
um, And I think We shouldn't necessarily think of
it that way, because, um, here's another like very
risky, dangerous job that I find to be like
a really fun source of entertainment for me, is
I love watching um the Baltimore Ravens, which is
an American football team. I love watching them play
football. There are no women that play pro football,
they absolutely couldn't. It's a super dangerous job, it's
potentially very objectifying. You see these men who are
like, maxed out athletically, like they are physically on
like the very like top 1% of some spectrum
of like, how fast you can run 40 yards
or something like that. Um. And then all of
us, you know, every Sunday, watch it en masse,
and we're like, we love this gendered labor, we're
gonna celebrate this gendered labor, and it's dangerous, and
it could be exploitative, and like some of the
people who participate in that industry. Do bad things
sometimes, but then some of those people are great,
and it's like such an achievement. And so I
sometimes think when people worry about pornography, for example,
saying like, oh, this is like, women's feminine bodies
are being objectified and viewed this way by men,
and it's like the male gaze and they're performing
for the male gaze, that that sort of represents
like a kind of internalized misogyny, that we think
that there's just already like, nothing kind of interesting
or admirable about like the way that Women can
perform as women, and that we've kind of already
like assume that that's going to be a degrading
form of labor, but then like very male coded
labor, we're like, oh, that's like athletic excellence, or
another industry on the flip side that you might
think of as similar to like prostitution would be
um like men fighting various, very dangerous jobs and
like commercial fishing or private security contractors, where they're
going to be subjected to violence, potentially. Um, AND
those jobs are not high status like being in
the NFL, and they select based on the physical
traits of the worker, and by selecting based on
the physical traits of the worker, primarily they're gonna
be selecting for men, and they're really, really dangerous,
difficult work, um, and In that way, like, I
don't think we should think that that's like a
presumptively, like, sexism against men, or that men are
being mistreated in some way. It's just that men
have a comparative advantage in selling those types of
labor, and the buyers of the labor have a
preference for purchasing it for men. And so, It
was kind of a long way. So when you
say like, oh, is there an intrinsic gender equality
in the sex market? Yes, there is, but there's
gender equality the other direction in other dangerous markets
or entertainment markets, and we don't really call that
out as a problem.
Right. Yeah, we will probably also come back to
that when later we talk about the issue of
uh trafficking, but I mean, one thing that I
find very interesting and referring again to the more
sort of conservatively minded people and the and the
feminists who fall more on the sex negative end
of the feminist spectrum. Uh, IT'S, it's, it's very
interesting to me that they, or at least it
appears to me that many times they approach, particularly
women who work in sex work, um, in a
sort of, uh, patronizing or paternalistic way because they
tell them. That or they say they claim that
uh they uh no woman really ever chooses to
be a sex worker and I mean they sort
of remove some of their agency in the way
that they assume that there must be something wrong
in their circumstances or something wrong with them psychologically
to engage in such work,
right. Absolutely, yeah, and. I understand what people are
saying about that because it, it is true. So
Peter Demarov wrote a book, making a paternalistic case
for regulating sex work and for prohibiting some kinds
of sex work. And part of his argument was,
a lot of sex workers say that their time
in the industry was very bad for them, and
that it was difficult for them to maintain relationships
while they were in the industry, even after being
in the industry, or that they experienced trauma from
being in the industry, and that was psychologically damaging.
Or they only got into the industry because they
had underlying psychological problems. All possibly true, like, I
grant all of that. However, People have a lot
of career choices that they make that could have
significant difficulties for them. So, you know, there's difficult
work being a divorce divorce lawyer, that might also,
like, change your view of marriage a bit, and
it can be very difficult work being a daycare
provider, because then you're also dealing with Bodily fluids
and, you know, difficult people because of toddlers all
the time, and the hours are really hard and
the pay is much worse. Everybody who is in
the labor market is making a difficult decision under
trade-offs. I have a great job, I love my
job, but even I wonder sometimes, like, am I
making the trade-off right between work and family? And
I know women who are stay at home moms,
and they wonder the same thing, and they think,
am I only a stay at home mom? BECAUSE,
like, I've been culturally pressured into thinking that my
best role is being a wife and mother, and
then I think to myself, am I really missing
out on something by going to work every day
and not becoming a wife, like it's focusing more
on being a wife and mother, cause I have
a lot of kids and I would like to
see them more, um. Everybody is in that position
where they're making a difficult trade-off, and they're doing
their best, making the trade-offs about the kind of
job that they're in. And a lot of times
people who are going into a certain industry will
be in that industry because they have some underlying
tolerance for it or ability for it, that they're
trying to optimize, but the negative outcomes in the
industry are actually Reflecting the same things that got
them into the industry in the first place. And
so, I think a lot of the negative outcomes
that we see in the sex industry is likely
selection effects, um, people who are getting into it
in the first place. So, for example, it's a
dangerous industry in a lot of contexts, so that
means that more risk tolerant people are likely to
go into the industry. But more risk tolerant people
are also more likely to have risky lives in
all other parts of their life as well. And
so then you look and you say, oh, look
at all these risks associated with women who work
in this industry, but it's very hard to separate
whether or not that tolerance for risk is the
reason they're in sex work, or if they got
into sex work and then they're exposed to more
risk. And so, I'm, I'm not denying the data,
but I'm denying a bit of the causal story
that's attributing the risks to being in the industry,
instead of saying that they're both kind of driven
by the same factor, um. And then I also
kind of think like, even if you buy all
of that stuff and say that it's bad for
people, making it illegal just makes it worse.
Yeah, uh, we'll come back to the legal aspects
of sex work later in our conversation. Um, I
mean, but from the data we have, I'm, I'm
not sure if we have actually good data on
that, but, uh, does sex work tend to be
associated with, uh, poverty or a lack of other
employment opportunities.
Um, It's again, it's tricky to figure this out,
so, In terms of hourly wages, It's all over
the place. So like, some sex workers are making
extremely low wages, um, so people who work on
the street, street sex workers, that's a very low
wage structure, um, and then often if there's a
third party involved, the wage is even lower, and
so that's very difficult work and it does not
pay well. Um, AT the higher end, you know,
performance, stripping, dancing, cam girls, all that, um, you'll
see a bigger range. People on OnlyFans also, very
low wages, um, for the most part, like 90%
of people who are doing online sex work are
like not making good money. Um, SO, The wages
aren't super great. Why would somebody do it if
they're not making like a ton of money at
that kind of bottom end? Well, again, people are
making trade-offs, and there are advantages to having that
kind of a workplace. So if you think of
people who do online sex work, one advantage is
be your own boss, or flexible hours, you can
work around other kinds of commitments, you could take
on a second job. Um, IF you can't make
it to work for some reason, that's OK. Like,
you, you're, you could fully bear the price of
your own, um, not being able to show up
or whatever, so people who have things going on
in their life where they're gonna have a preference
for more inconsistent hours or more workplace flexibility, they
might trade off in those ways. Also, At the
higher end, people do make higher wages, and then
I do think that there is like, probably a
little bit of like, People might have a preference,
all else equal, for like, not having to go
through like an institutional employer, we have to like
show up every single day in that way, um,
and like that's like it's just an advantage across
the board that we see in a lot of
um illegal labor markets, that people will sort of
select out of institutional employment because Some of the
restrictions that come with institutional employment, they don't wanna
do, um, and so like, it's kind of all
over the place in that way, yeah, and you
say like, well, is poverty the thing that's like
driving them into it. Look, everybody works for money.
Like, it is true that some people might become
sex workers because were they not employed, they would
not be able to meet their basic needs. That's
also why people become baristas. That's also why people,
you know, work at a grocery store, like, everybody
who's showing up to work is showing up to
work because they need to make money to pay
their rent. And so, Yes, in a sense, but
like, That's just how work is. That's just labor.
Uh, I wanted to ask you about how sex
work tends to be stigmatized in society. So earlier,
for example, you mentioned how, uh, some, uh, uh,
I, I'm not sure if, um, most of them,
but at least some sex workers have a hard
time, uh, in their own personal relationships, particularly probably
romantic relationships because of the kind of work they
do or the kind of work they did. Um,
I mean, do you think that, uh, the stigmatization
of sex work might also play an important role
in, um, the negative effects that sex workers might
suffer psychologically, that, I mean, perhaps. Some of it
does not necessarily have directly to do with the
work itself, but rather with how society treats the
work and treats sex workers, and where do you
think that stigmatization stems from?
Oh my gosh, I'm so happy you brought that
up. Yes, I do think that one of the
primary harms. That sex workers experience is the taboo
surrounding being a sex worker, and it's just that
we have these stories in our head that we
tell ourselves that are very damaging. To the sex
workers, of course, but I think that sometimes sex
workers themselves tell themselves that story. They kind of
tell themselves the story of their own deviance or
something, and that can make it hard to feel
kind of self-acceptance, that's very difficult. Like, if you're
in an industry where everybody is saying that you're
doing something wrong, we see this in a lot
of industries. You know, think of like police officers,
who after there was a lot of criticism of
police officers, then police officers said, it's very hard
for me to do my job because I feel
like when I tell someone I'm a cop, everybody's
judging me. Or like when troops came home from
Vietnam in the United States, they said, wow, like
I went through this very difficult job, and now
nobody even appreciates that. People think that I'm doing
something bad. Sex workers have a similar thing where
They'd say like, oh, people think that I wouldn't
be a good mother. In some cases, sex workers
can have their parental rights imperiled because They're participating
in the legal industry, and then judges will look
disfavorably on that, and so there's this kind of
collective. Negative judgment, a collective stigma against them, and
just living in a stigmatized state like that can
be really hard on a person, I completely agree,
um. And I also think that You know, so
part of it is like the stigma does make
The job worse, um, people's attitudes around sex works
make the job work. I think that the stigma
also applies to the men who pay for sex,
um, because I also don't think that should be
stigmatized, and You know, there's a lot of reasons
that men might pay for sex, and A lot
of women are choosing their sexual partners based on
financial considerations, even if they're not sex workers, and
those women are not stigmatized, and I think men
get that, and I think sometimes men might have
a preference for sex work for reasons that, like,
it's it's better with their lifestyle, or they can't
find a willing sexual partner without paying them, and,
you know, they're maybe like low status men. Or
men who kind of don't have as much money
might be able to like access sex work in
a way that's like, You know, if you're really
rich, then a person might want to be with
you for your money, like Donald Trump or whatever,
even if you're not, like, a great looker, you're
not super charismatic, you know, we can still see
women marrying those guys for money, but men who
have less money, less disposable income, less of ability
to set somebody up with life. It could be
really hard for them to find an intimate partner
who's willing, and if they're paying for a sex
worker, that's also really stigmatizing, and that's also a
real harm against them that they feel like people
are judging them or that they can't be open
about. How they find intimate partners, and so it
goes both ways. I think that the stigma is
so harmful to the sex workers, the people who
pay for sex. On, on both ends, like.
Yeah, and at the end of the day, probably
what we should care most about is whether uh
the interaction there, I mean the transaction wherever you
want to call it is consensual,
right? Yeah, and I think that um, You know,
think about massage therapy. Like, have you ever like
heard a person be like, Oh, I gotta like,
uh, skip happy hour after work cause I'm gonna
go get a massage. And you would never be
like, OK, weird that you told me that, that
you're just gonna like go pay somebody to like
touch your body for 45 minutes, like, uh, you
know, like, we would never, we'd be like, OK,
yeah, like I saw a chiropractor or whatever, and
like people will say all the time that they're
like paying people to touch their bodies or to
do bodily services that they find pleasurable or improve
their life or their mental health in some way,
going to therapy, and we're all totally open and
fine with it. Um, AND so I kind of
think. For sex work, it will never be the
same because of the things they said about institution
of marriage and monogamy and how people feel very
threatened by their partner potentially seeing a sex worker,
but I would like it to be more like
massage therapy.
Yeah, and sometimes we go to the doctor or
we are hospitalized, and the doctor, he or she
or the nurses have to touch us as well
to take care of us.
Right, yeah. And if you found out that somebody,
you know, did a job like that, where they
were doing physical labor to provide intimate services to
somebody with, you know, reproductive medicine, for example, something
like that. Yeah, that's very helpful to people. That's
a valuable service. You wouldn't stigmatize it. I personally
think that If someone like, I don't understand, people
will sometimes say like, oh well, like imagine, like
if someone you knew, like your sister were a
sex worker, like wouldn't you be like, oh, that's
so gross, like, she's just like seeing all these
men all the time. I think this all the
time when I go to the dentist, that like,
People who work at dentists, they're just like putting
their hands in people's mouths, like 15 miles a
day, and they're just like in there, and it's
like uh, like I get like such an ick
from dentistry, and I can imagine like a bizarre
world of aliens could look at Earth and they're
like, oh my God, there's these offices on every
corner in strip malls all over. The world where
people just show up and pay other people to
just like put their hands in their mouth and
like move things around and like oof and like
pull stuff out and it's like, oh that's so
gross. And then they would see like sex work
and they're like, oh look, and like those people
are having a good time, like it's like if
we just look at like all of our history
of like sexual taboo out of our heads, it's
definitely not the grossest kind of work. That's dentistry.
Yeah, and I mean I think that of course,
but Yeah, and of course I think that people,
of course they can have their own eks, their
own their own personal preferences, that's perfectly fine, but
going from there to stigmatizing whatever kind of activity
you find gross or disgusting or even wanting it
banned from society, I mean, that's not OK.
That's my view. I'm not trying to make dentistry
illegal. I'm, I myself go to the dentist. I
just couldn't be me.
Yeah, right. So let me ask you another thing
that because this is an argument that we hear
very often from, uh, again, people who are against
sex work. They claim that sex work is always
exploitative. Uh, WHAT do you reply to that?
The word exploitation is such a distraction in my
view, because there's two ways we could think about
it. One way you could think about exploitation is
anytime that there's a really significant asymmetry in bargaining
power in an economic exchange. So, like one person
really, really, really needs the exchange to happen, and
then the other person has a huge amount of
power that that one that exchange is gonna make
a difference to them, take it or leave it,
kind of. Um, SO on that view, You know,
if I have a life saving anti-venom, and you've
been bitten by a snake, and I want to
sell it to you, even if I sell it
to you at a pretty fair price, I can't
help but exploit you, because you need the anti-venom
so much more than I need to sell it
to you. I don't need it at all. I
haven't been bitten by a snake. Um, AND if
you think of that kind of power asymmetry definition
of exploitation, then it's gonna be very hard to
differentiate. The kinds of markets that we really, really
want there to be, like markets in emergency medical
services or pharmaceuticals, from Exploitative markets. It's gonna be
hard to have any structural feature of a market
that's exploitative, that's gonna differentiate the kinds of markets
we really want to incentivize because people really, after
all, do need emergency medical services and things like
that, and the ones that we want to discourage
like payday lending or sex work or things like
that, where we feel like people are being exploited
and it's not actually in their interest to have
access to this exploitative market. So, that's one definition,
and that's just gonna rule in a bunch of.
SEEMINGLY markets that we want to have. Another way
sometimes people will define exploitation is they'll say, no,
no, my theory of exploitation just is moralized. It's
a market where participating in the market, if you're
the less advantaged person, means that your rights have
been violated, um, because, for example, you had a
right to assistance, or you had a right to
have your basic needs met, but then, if you
think that that's what's going on with exploitation, that
it's like, someone has some Other unjust material deprivation.
They can't meet their basic needs, they can't pay
their rent, something like that. They're below a standard
of sufficiency, and then the exploiter swoops in and
says, I'll give you a title loan or a
payday loan, or I'll let you work in my
sweatshop, or I'll let you be a sex worker
or something like that. Um, THEN the wrongfulness of
exploitation is not, in my view, located in the
exploiter who's doing more for that person who is
below the standard of sufficiency than anyone else in
society, it's located in the fact that that person
is unjustly below a standard of sufficiency, and then
you wanna ask, who's worse for that person, the
sweatshop owner who swoops in and says, work in
my sweatshop, or The payday lender who says, I'll
give you a high interest loan, or the person
who owns a brothel that says, oh, you can
come work and sell sexual services, or everybody else
in society who's doing absolutely nothing for this person.
And so, even if you think that it's really
bad that some people are unjustly below a standard
of material sufficiency. The person who's exploiting them is
doing more for them than literally everybody else, and
so I don't think you should blame that person.
Yeah, so we've already discussed whether sex work is
a choice or not. Another kind of argument that
I hear from people who are against sex work
is that it objectifies women. Uh, WHAT do you
reply to that?
So, it might. It might objectify women, um, in
the same way that like the NFL might objectify
NFL players. So when we think, what is the
bad thing about objectification to treat somebody as an
object, it's not that you're treating them as a
means, because of, again, all labor is gonna treat
someone as a means, it's that you're treating them
as a mere means, that like, the only thing
that you're really focusing on is what they can
do for you, is their instrumental value. Generally, If
you're treating someone as a mere means, like you're
only caring about their instrumental value. That's a red
flag because it's gonna prompt you to treat them
in a way where you don't treat them like
a person, and you don't care about their consent,
and you don't care about lying to them, and
you don't care about whether or not it's fully
voluntary, like, you know, you don't really care about
anything about where they're coming from, um. And so
people will worry about objectification sometimes because it's a
red flag or it's a The thing that correlates
sometimes with their rights, a person's rights are being
violated because the person who's doing the objectifying isn't
paying attention to the rights at all. On the
other hand, if you have the assurance that there's
no rights violation happening, or sometimes a person could
be objectified and they don't even know that they're
being objectified, like they're totally unaware of it, they
suffer no harm from it in any way, um,
and they fully consented to whatever the conditions were,
then I kind of think like, OK, like no
harm, no foul, cause it's like nobody was treated
in a way where their rights were violated, it's
fully consensual, they weren't deceived in any way. So
all of the stuff that goes along with treating
somebody fully instrumentally, where you're not tracking whether they're
a full participant, all of those concerns have already
been canceled out. And so then if you're treating
somebody in the objectifying way where it's like, you
don't really care that much about them, um, But
none of their rights were violated. I kind of
think like, yeah, like it could be like not
a great way to interact with people, but I
don't think that it's immoral, it's just that like
you should really kind of consider that they're a
person and like, you know, want to like, keep
that top of mind, but the real problem with
objectification is usually that When you treat someone like
an object, you don't treat them like a full
participant, and they're not consenting, and in sex work,
I'm assuming that the kind of sex work I'm
defending. Person's not being deceived, they are fully consenting,
and so even if it's objectifying in a sense.
I don't think that the problems that go along
with objectification are still there. There is a philosopher,
Ray Langton, who says, no, no, it can still
be there, because if people get really used to
viewing women as sex objects, then it'll make it
so that they're not paying attention to women's consent.
That they stop hearing women, even if a woman
says no, they hear that as performative, or they
hear that as not really saying no, because, you
know, a person might have watched a lot of
objectifying pornography and then gone into the habit of
like not hearing women as being full agents or
full authors of their lives. And so she thinks
that, If there is an industry like pornography, is
her case, that really fully objectifies women, it could
make it so that people tend to view women
as objects more generally and treat women as objects
without caring about their consent. That seems to me
to be partly an empirical hypothesis, that's not true,
um, but even if it were true, the thing
that you would say is that you should have
very strong protections for women's rights and women's consent,
um, not that you should ban the porn necessarily,
like you, you wouldn't want to limit the thing
that causes the bad behavior, you'd want to prohibit
the bad behavior. It's a similar structure of an
argument when people say, oh, like when people do
drugs, they don't show up for work, they steal
your TV. Their bad boyfriends, so we should prohibit
drugs. But it's like, well, wait a minute, just
fire people who don't show up for work, break
up with your bad boyfriend. Arrest a person for
stealing people's TVs, like, it's like, it might be
that a practice is correlated with unethical behavior, but
That doesn't mean that that's a reason to focus
on the practice. You could still hold people accountable
for the unethical behavior.
And also I don't know what you think about
this, but when I hear this kind of argument
regarding objectification, um, the impression I get is that
the issue people have here is with sexually objectifying
women, but doesn't that also happen at least to
some extent even in our romantic relationships? I mean,
we, we are also attracted to our partner's body,
right? It's not just. Their personality traits or whatever.
I mean that's part of the deal, I guess
so objectification, uh, it's not always a matter of
just uh reading the other person of all their
rights or their humanity. It's sometimes it's just a
matter of including some sexual attraction or something like
that, right? And that's there's nothing wrong with it.
That's a good point, and I mean, there's some
research and people who will suggest that a lot
of women, their own sexual desire will be very
responsive, and so, women will want to be viewed
a little bit as a sex object by their
partners, they want to be viewed as primarily sexually
res desirable, and like, their own desire for men
is responding to the men viewing them as a
sex object or as a person who's beautiful or
something like that. And so, you might think that
if a person is like very, very strong responsive
desire, that they might really value being seen in
that way, like, and so online sex work might
select for people who have very strong responsive desire
and want to be viewed in that way. And
in that case, they would have a taste for
that kind of labor, that could be like a
a thing that they really like about the industry.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, I've heard, uh, for example,
porn stars and other kinds of sex workers actually
saying that uh they like the idea of of
being seen nude by other people and stuff like
that, so it's just their own experience,
I guess. I know, and I think a lot
of people have that in different forms, like, you
talk to a lot of professors, a lot of
professors are performing their own intelligence. And like, a
thing that they really value about their job is
that other people will ask them to, like, come
on a podcast and tell them that they're so
smart, and I'm like, they'll get to be seen
as smart by other people, and they have responsive
desires to be viewed as objects of intellectual. Wisdom
or intellectual capacity like to be viewed as good
in this way, um, and no one thinks like,
oh my gosh, it's so gross that like, Everybody
is just viewing you as like a, a cake
factory, like, you know, no, I don't think that,
like I think like everybody is performing some trait
of themselves that they value, and so I don't
think it's wrong for sex workers to perform a
trait that they value about themselves.
Yeah, it's like, oh my God, nobody cares about
me, they only care about my ideas.
I know, right. Yeah,
OK,
so Peter Singer, he's just being used for his
interesting takes on animal rights, yeah.
OK, so let's get into the more uh legal
aspects of uh sex work here. So, Do you
think that the possibility of selling and buying sex
should be treated as a matter of rights?
Yeah, I do. Oh, OK,
so explain, please.
So, in the past, it was illegal for people
to have um homosexual relationships. And sex outside of
the marriage context was illegal in some places, or
oral sex between heterosexual couples was prohibited. Um, AND
even,
even interracial marriage,
interracial marriage, there's all sorts of sexual taboos that
we used to entrench into our law that made
it so that people couldn't choose their sexual partners
or they couldn't do certain kinds of sex acts
voluntarily between people and Even the government would sort
of take a stand on like what the reasons
were for why people were having sex, just make
sure that they were only having sex for the
right reasons and not the wrong reasons, so app
procreative sex was the right kind of a reason,
recreational sex was the wrong, that's why, you know,
people wanted to make have sodomy laws or make
oral sex prohibited, things like that, um. And I
feel like all of those laws were such an
incursion on people's rights to privacy, and their freedom
of association, and their rights to make just like
the most intimate decisions about your own family. Also,
throughout the past, there's been a lot of censorship
of things that were seen as seditious or lewd,
people's ways of expressing themselves were censored, how people
could dress was censored, and here again, I think
that that was such a violation of a person's
just general right of self-determination, the right to say
what they want, freedom of conscience, the right to
do what you want with your own body. And
so, I think we've made just an incredible amount
of progress over the last 200 years, this kind
of liberal democratic revolution and respecting people's privacy rights
when it comes to intimate choices, and then their
freedom of association and conscience to like make whatever
decisions they want with their own minds and bodies.
Great. I think sex work is one of the,
you know, a few others, but it was one
of the last areas where those old taboos really
still have a grip on people, and it's absolutely
just none of their business. And so, I think
that a person has a right to accept money
from another person, a person has a right to
give money to another person, a person has a
right to choose who they have sex with and
under what conditions, and you put those three rights
together, and now you have a right to sell
sex and to pay for sex. That's it.
Uh, SO, uh, uh, perhaps this will be a
good point to introduce this question because earlier we
also talked about, uh, feminism and how you also
have a feminist approach to sex work because sometimes
I get this sense that, uh, you know, people
who are against sex work, um, what they are
against more broadly, I, I'm not saying everyone is
like this. But at least some people, what they
are against more broadly is uh the free expression
of women's sexuality and women having uh the right
and the possibility of er um having sex with
whom they want when they want either in and
out or outside of marriage because many times um
the same people. Who present themselves as being against
sex workers are also the same who talk against
hookup culture and against casual sex and all of
that. I mean, as a feminist, do you get
that idea that perhaps being against sex work is
more broadly against uh being against um the free
expression of female sexuality?
I do think that sometimes there is that where
um And we'll see this both on the left
and the right. So, you know, people on the
right will say, you know, when I was a
kid, they, they used to wear purity rings, like,
you know, encouraging women to save themselves for their
husbands, that kind of thing, and that was against
hookup culture. And then on the left, people would
be against like Girls gone wild and fraternity culture
and um. You know, the way that hookup culture
objectifies women by making it so that women feel
more pressure to have casual sex with men, so
that they could maybe rope in a partner, that
kind of thing. Um, SO you see it kind
of on both ends. I actually think both of
those sides kind of have a good point in
some ways. Um, I think that We can see
cultural equilibrium when it comes to the culture behind
sex. It's gonna depend a little bit on like
sex ratios and what Men and women and heterosexual
couples are interested in, and so I think it's
plausible that for women, and I teach on a
college campus, for women on college campuses, they would
have a preference for less hookup culture, but when
there's like a sex ratio where there's fewer available
or eligible men relative to the supply of women,
then the women feel pressured in that context to
like, be more sexually available or to signal more
sexual availability. Because they're competing with other women for
culture, for for men in that culture, and so
it's like the men have more bargaining power, and
it is gonna like lead to a kind of
more sexually permissive. Uh, HOOKUP culture, and like, I
don't think women collectively. I think collectively women are
causing this as a kind of collective action problem,
and then it's, you know, they would all prefer
to have more restrictive norms, or not all, but
a lot of them would prefer to have more
restrictive norms, but they feel kind of pressure to
like, get men and it's, it's just tough. And
I have a friend who teaches a religious college,
which is the opposite, and the men, you know,
they, they don't prefer that, they, they, they wish
that it was more permissive towards casual sex and
that they didn't have to marry somebody first. And
so, You know, that we see that across cultures
that the sex ratio is gonna determine kind of
what the sexual norms are internal to the culture,
and there can be these collective action problems where
everybody wishes it were different, but here they are
in this competition for partners, and like, That's their
situation, um. And so I, I am sympathetic to
when people say like, oh, like hookup culture is
a problem for women, and purity culture is a
problem for women or a problem for men in
some cases. I totally get that, um. But I
think that a lot of times when people find
themselves in those difficult choice situations, The thing that
they need are just more options, and so, you
know, men also have like a lot of um
Difficulty with the current dating equilibrium, you know, they'll
say like, online dating is so hard, women are
selecting on a very narrow range of traits. If
I don't have that very narrow narrow range of
traits, a lot of those women are competing for
a narrower pool of guys, and they're just ruling
out a bunch of other guys that would have
been great, um, and like, they're also struggling out
there, and like, I see those guys too, and
I'm sympathetic. For all of these people, I'm like,
what you need is more freedom. It's like, you
just need more options, like, you need to get
off campus. If you, if you really hate the
dating equilibrium in your environment, it'd be really great
if you could access, like, a different possible pool
of partners, like, that would be wonderful for you.
And so, I'm sympathetic to the people that think
that there can be, like, better or worse. Equilibria.
Sometimes people who defend sex work will say they'll
say that they're sex positive, and then they say
that they should be like sex maximalists, like, everybody
should get over monogamy, like people shouldn't be so
prudish, like, everybody should just like be more liberated
in this way. I don't think everybody wants that.
I think a lot of people will have a
preference for more monogamy, a slower pace in the
relationship. That's OK, like that's all right too. Like,
that's not, I don't want to pathologize that and
say that that's like sex negative or that that's
like, It's just people have different preferences. Um, WHAT
I want is for everybody's preferences to, like, be
able to be more out in the open, for
them to have as many options as possible to
find somebody that will meet them where they are.
Mhm. So, getting into legal approaches to sex work,
what do you make of the Nordic model, because
many people who want to I don't know, at
least regulate sex work to some extent, defend the
Nordic model. So what do you think of it?
Yeah, my co-author Laurie Watson in the sex workbook,
she defends the Nordic model, and the advantage of
the Nordic model is that Ideally, if it's ideally
enforced, it will protect women who sell sex from
experiencing criminal penalties for selling sex. And so, you
know, if you wanna help women by prohibiting sex
work, It would be weird to do it the
way that we do it in the United States,
where women can be arrested for selling sex, and
so it's a strange way to help somebody by
taking away their kids, making it so that they
can't work, and putting, putting them in jail. Like,
that's not helpful. The Nordic model takes that insight
and says, no, no, we're not gonna criminalize the
sale of sex, we'll only criminalize the purchasing of
sex, we'll criminalize the men, um, because they're the
ones who are exploiting women or potentially mistreating women,
but I also think if you think that sex
work is bad for women, A thing that's not
gonna help them is making it so that the
only men that they can find as available clients
are men who are willing to violate the law,
and who are, you're gonna select or structure it
in a way where you're setting those women up
to have a much more risky, risk acceptant clientele,
and that's definitely gonna shrink the size of the
sex market, because if you make something illegal, fewer
people will do it. And so, fewer women will
become sex workers because it'll be more competitive and
less lucrative, and there will be less of a
market for them, and so you will reduce the
number of women who become sex workers who otherwise
You know, would have chosen that choice in a
more permissive model. Um, BUT the remaining sex workers,
of which there will be fewer cause the market
will be smaller, will have a much more dangerous
job. And in addition to that, Often, if something
is still an illegal or gray market or criminalized
industry, the people who are participating in that industry
are going to be involved in other illegal activity,
and then it is the case that the women
in that industry are going to still be subject
to more discretionary interference by law enforcement. And so,
if the goal of the Nordic model is to
protect women from criminal penalties or being interfered with
by law enforcement, it doesn't fully protect them, and
there still are going to be disincentives for them
to, for example, call the police if they're assaulted
or somebody steals from. The, because to do so
would be to maybe put the people that they're
working with in danger, or to give the police
some pretext to investigate them for other kind of
illegal conduct, or it could threaten their parental rights
or their housing situation. And so, I don't think
that the Nordic model really achieves its goal as
being better for women than the criminal model that
we have in the United States. Instead, I think
it should be more like New Zealand, where it's
a Regulated bodily service industry.
Uh, TELL us more about that. You defend decriminalization,
correct? So, uh, could you explain your position?
Um, SO, if we think about sex work as
full fully decriminalized, um, a good analogy would be
exotic dancing, as it has somewhere, or pornography, um,
where, where it's legal to make pornography, or massage
therapy. Like, all of those are industries that have
some kind of erotic service, which are regulated based
on some occupational health and safety, which I even
don't like myself, but if you want it, take
it, um. But there's a path, there's a path
for this to just be a normalized legal industry.
And even in, you know, New Zealand, there's a
case where a woman was working at a brothel
and was able to successfully sue her managers for
sexual harassment, though she was a sex worker, because
the terms and conditions of her labor included sexual
labor, but didn't include sexual labor with respect to
the management. And so, those types of, like, workplace
protections that I view as kind of like, You
know, some of the occupational health and safety regulations,
I view myself as overly paternalistic, but if the
thing you really care about is occupational health and
safety, having it fully regulated, like other kinds of
industries, and like fully into the normalized economy, that
I think is like a really good step of
just giving people the assurance that they can call
the police if they're assaulted, if someone steals from
them, they can, you know, sue their manager for
violating labor law, whatever the labor law is. Um,
SO I think that that's a That's a better
approach for people. Just make it like other kinds
of work.
And I mean, what would you say are the
main differences between people who defend the Nordic model
and people like you who defend the criminalization, because
it's, it also seems to me that people who
defend the Nordic model come from the position that
sex work is bad and ideally it shouldn't exist,
and people who defend the criminalization. Uh, I mean,
don't think there's anything wrong with sex work necessarily,
right? Yeah, I mean, the goal of the Nordic
model is sometimes stated as abolition, where they just
think there shouldn't be markets in sex, like people
shouldn't, um, be buying or selling sexual services, and
I don't think that abolition is a feasible goal,
and I don't think it's a good goal. And
another thing about the decriminalization approach is that The
Nordic model, because it has this kind of gender
asymmetry between the buyer and the seller, it really
is saying that it's wrong for a man to
pay for sex. But I don't think that it's
wrong for a man to pay for sex. I
think men have rights to pay for sex, because
I think men have rights to also choose their
partners and to give money for their partners. And
so, everywhere allows sugaring, which is men, rich men
dating women, I guess, in exchange for presents and
gifts. Sugaring pays less than sex work, it's a
worse job for women, but everybody permits that because
it's seen as within the purview of dating rather
than in the purview of industry. Um, WOMEN who
do sugaring, they're not paying taxes on it, they
have few legal protections, as, you know. Workers because
they're not viewed as workers. At that point, like
if a man can pay a woman in that
way, I think you should have a right to
Just pay a sex worker directly, and I think
that men, some men really benefit from having access
to that, and so, I don't think we should
like pathologize or stigmatize men. I don't think it's
wrong for a man to be a buyer of
sex, and so because it's not wrong, it shouldn't
be illegal, like it is in the Nordic model.
Mhm. So, one last topic that I would like
to ask you about because it is brought up
a lot and of course it's a very important
issue to discuss. Um, WHAT do you make of
sex trafficking associated with sex work? First of all,
I mean, I know that um sometimes, I, I
mean that there's data that uh uh I mean,
sex work itself doesn't cause as much sex trafficking
as people think, or at least some legal approaches
to sex work like decriminalization would reduce sex trafficking
instead of other approaches like the Nordic model. I
mean, I've heard arguments like that. Um, I mean,
what do you think about that and how do
you think we can best fight it?
I mean, anybody who says that they have good
data when it comes to human trafficking and sex
work is not telling the truth. Like the data
we have is like, It's very poor. A lot
of the studies are gonna come from people who
are like rescued from sex trafficking, but then, of
course, those people will often have incentives from the
people who are helping them to say that it
was sex trafficking and to really play up the
magnitude of this. There is definitely some Forced labor,
you know, coercion, people who can't leave, people who
have their passports taken, and then they're pushed into
sex work. That comes from a constellation of like
horrible injustices, like immigration restrictions, partly, that's one, The
fact that it's illegal, which means that people have
a lot of fear going to the police, they're
dealing with a criminal clientele, people who, you know,
select into that industry, it's very difficult for people
to get out. Um, SO that does happen, and
people who, you know, disagree with me, people who
are proponents of criminalization or the Nordic model, they
are right that if the size of the market
for sex decreases. In general, then the proportion of
the market, which is trafficking, might stay the same,
but the net amount of people who are trafficked
will also decrease because there's just less of a
general sex market in this society, and so, because
fewer people are paying for sex, there's fewer sex
buyers out there, there's less of an incentive for
people who are trafficked to enter into that industry.
On the other hand, The more regulated an industry
is, like, the more restrictive the regulations are, the
harder it is to monitor, prevent, and punish trafficking.
And so if you're looking for like missing and
exploited children, if you're trying to get people to
come out and prosecute people who have coerced them
in some way, All of that enforcement stuff is
gonna be much more difficult if you don't permit
sex workers to screen clients online, to have dual
verification, to have facial recognition of all sex workers
online, so that you can screen to look for
missing and exploited people and on these online markets,
marketplaces, and so, it's sort of tricky cause it's
like, yes, like if you shrink the size of
the market, then there will be a the proportion
of people who are exploited or trafficked. Might go
up, but the net number of them will go
down because the market's smaller. However, finding those people
will become, like, much more difficult, deterrence becomes much
more difficult. And so, it's just like kind of
a trade-off system where, like, no one really knows
what the perfect institutional arrangement would be to fully
limit trafficking. And it's also tricky in places like
Europe, especially, because of the border system, where people
can kind of move around, there's different enforcement regimes.
So, if you're an island like New Zealand, it's
much easier for you to prevent and punish and
track all of this. But if it's a place
where there's a porous border, it's like, you know,
tricky to track people down across the borders. Yeah,
like, that is a legitimate concern, that is tough.
Um, AND there's labor trafficking, you know, agricultural labor,
all sorts of other kinds of human trafficking for
labor. It's a really difficult problem, and I'm not
like discounting that in any way. I think Because
there's a minority of the industry that does have
severe coercion, like non-voluntary human forced labor. That is
awful, but I don't think that that fact is
a reason to ban the entire industry for everybody
else. Um, THAT'S a different kind of activity that
should be criminalized, but you shouldn't criminalize the whole
industry because a subset of the people in that
industry. ARE having forced labor. So think about knowledge
of agricultural labor, there's a lot of human trafficking
in agricultural labor as well. People, you know, they
think they're going to do one thing, someone takes
their passports, they can't get out, they're not getting
the money, it like escalates, they can't get a
ticket home, now they're in a ton of debt,
people back home are going after their family, the
whole thing, everything we hear with the sex trafficking,
we also see in agricultural labor. But nobody would
say, We should ban Blueberry farming and almond farming
in California, because there's a lot of people who
are victims of human trafficking within that industry. Like,
it doesn't fall like that's the fact that it's
blueberry picking or almond farming or whatever, it has
nothing to do, the problem is that somebody was
kidnapped and their passports were stolen and that they
can't leave, like, that is a crime, not the
almond farming, you know, like that's like a different
thing, um. And so I don't want to discount
the possibility of trafficking. I think it does happen.
Another thing that does happen though, that's not human
trafficking is sometimes. People who talk about sex trafficking
will have a very, very, very permissive definition of
what sex trafficking is, that's not the kind of
sex trafficking that you probably have in mind when
you're thinking about it. So sometimes people will say,
if there's a third party who profits from the
sale of sex, then the sex worker has been
trafficked. And that definition is supposed to get rid
of like pimping and like brothel owners and all
that other stuff, and No, it's kind of saying
like, if, if a sex worker is giving some
of her wages or is like beholden to a
person, then we're going to define her as being
trafficked. But sometimes the sex worker is giving a
person their wages in exchange for security, or screening
and vetting clients, or because that's a romantic partner
of theirs, or because there's like substance use disorder
issues and there's some kind of exchange related to
substance use that's also motivating the person to sell
sex. And so, all of those situations, I don't
think we should call those things trafficking, because imagine
that a woman, you know, has a boyfriend. And
she's paying the rent, but there's some kind of
like substance issue, and she's paying the rent by
going out into the world and working as a
barista at a coffee shop. Now it is true
that like, You know, there's a man who's like
living entirely off of her labor, doing barista work,
and she's paying the rent, and she's only with
him because there's this kind of like substance issue
that like he's a supplier of hers or something,
but we wouldn't say that the coffee shop where
she works is like complicit in her being trafficked
into forced barista labor because there's a third party
living back at home who profits from the sale
of her coffee making services. Like that's not. The
way that we should generally think about how forced
labor works. And so, I do think that it's
true that there is sex trafficking, but I also
think that the definition of sex trafficking that some
people use does inflate the magnitude of the problem
by defining any third party profiting from the sale
as being a trafficker, and that's not true.
Yes, and I think that the point that you
made there, uh, when you mentioned that for example
we can also find cases of, uh, very unfortunate,
of course, human trafficking in agriculture, in construction, and
so on. I mean, you never hear, or at
least I've never heard anyone making the case or
making the claim that then we should abolish construction
or abolish agriculture. Or some completely weird thing like
that. I mean, I, I think that when it
comes to sex work, uh, they are already motivated
to, because of their own moral values to, uh
uh I mean they've already arrived at the conclusion
that sex work has to be abolished because of
how they moralize it and then they come up
with the sex trafficking argument just to support their
conclusion.
Yeah, that's my thought.
Yeah. OK, so, uh, Doctor Flanagan, uh, just before
we go, would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet? Sure,
it's Jess Flanagan.com. It's my website, my work up
there. Yeah, check it out.
Yeah, I will be leaving a link to it
in the description of the interview. And thank you
so much for taking the time to come on
the show and thank you for the fascinating, fascinating
conversation.
Thank you so much. Thank you for the invitation.
It was great talking to you. Those are such
good questions. Appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.